Hello everyone.
In this lesson we will answer the question what does the phrase mobile first mean throughout this lesson.
Here's what we will cover.
So first I want to explain how the phrase mobile first can mean different things when it's used in different
contexts.
After that I want to talk about how we can apply the mobile first philosophy to our travel Web site.
And finally you and I will work together to begin writing CSX the mobile first way.
All right.
So let's begin up at the top and ask the question what does the phrase mobile first even mean.
We can answer that with a few other questions namely what is responsive web design and what are the
shortcomings with traditional Responsive Web Design.
Here's what I mean by that.
Let's imagine a responsive Web site.
So the layout and content of this hypothetical page are optimized for the size of the device that is
viewing it.
So maybe the page uses a three call them layout on a laptop or desktop maybe it uses a two column layout
on a tablet and maybe things collapse to a single column layout on a smartphone.
Now one Responsive Web Design first began we would build the desktop or the most advanced view of the
site first and then adapt the layout to fit smaller and smaller screens as necessary.
So we moved in this direction.
We built in this direction eventually two big factors made the web design community reverse this and
begin building in the opposite direction.
So what were those two factors.
Why did we decide that this was a good idea.
Why is mobile first important.
Well factor number one was that we had recently just witnessed a change.
We're not even a change.
A revolution in the way that people use the Internet.
So now significantly more traffic comes from mobile devices than traditional desktops or laptops.
And your primary source of traffic should not be an afterthought.
You should design and build with it in mind from the beginning.
Factor number two is that we eventually realized that traditional desktop first responsive design resulted
in bloated slow loading Web sites because even though we used CSX to adapt and optimize the layout for
different devices we were still forcing tiny smartphones to download huge image files that were intended
for desktop monitors.
So for example we might have had a large image that was 400 killer bytes and it was large enough to
look good on a 27 inch desktop monitor.
But sending that image to a smartphone user is a huge waste of their data plan because a way smaller
image that weighs only 30 or 40 killer bytes still would have looked crisp and sharp on the smaller
smartphone screen.
And it also would have loaded way faster.
Now that's just one example.
The key concept behind factor number two is that we don't want anyone to have to download extra data
that they won't even use.
We want to build efficient Web sites that load as quickly as possible for everyone.
And it just so happens that beginning with the most advanced view of our site as the baseline and trying
to strip it down is not the best way of doing things.
It no longer made sense and browser technology had advanced to the point where we could easily do better
which is obviously where mobile first comes into play.
The idea behind mobile first is that we begin with the most essential view of our site and we progressively
enhance the layout and the assets only when necessary for larger and more advanced devices.
All right.
So at this point we have a general idea of what mobile first is referring to.
Now let's talk about the different context that the phrase can be used in.
So there's the design context and the development context.
So when we think of mobile first design this refers to actually designing around a smaller screen first.
This can be a good idea because smaller screens force us to really prioritize what we want to showcase.
People also have a shorter attention span when using a mobile device.
So this will force us to try and anticipate the most common actions that our visitors will want to take
and place those front and center in our design.
So when we think of who is involved in mobile first design it's the information architects it's the
graphic designers and it's the usability experts.
When we hear about mobile first development this refers to coding this site in such a way that devices
won't download unnecessary data.
It means that as a developer we treat the most essential view of our Web site as our baseline.
And we code upwards from there as a mobile first developer it's our job to make the site load quickly
for everyone.
So obviously these two contexts are closely related to each other.
The only reason I even bother to try and draw a distinction between the two is because now I want to
talk about how mobile first can be applied to our travel Web site because you might have noticed that
the designer on our team did not send us a design file for how the site should look.
On a smaller mobile device I set the course up like this on purpose because in the real world a fair
amount of the projects you work on will not include a design comp for the mobile view.
And I see way too many developers using this as an excuse to many developers think in terms of all or
nothing.
They think oh well the information architect on my team or the graphic designer on my team did not provide
me with a mobile first design view.
So I'm just going to develop this Web site as if it was the year 2009.
I don't like that.
I don't think it's a valid excuse and I don't think that's fully embracing our job as a developer in
my opinion.
Even if you were only given a desktop design comp there is no reason to not make every Web site you
develop a mobile first Web site.
So even though we aren't working an absolutely ideal conditions we are not going to let anything get
in the way of building a Web site that loads insanely fast on all devices.
So where do we begin.
When it comes to mobile first best practices there are things we can do in each of the Big Three languages
HMO CSX and JavaScript.
We are going to begin with CSX.
So right now let's cut the intro and learn how to write CSX from a mobile first perspective.
All right.
So like always let's begin by jumping into the command line and let's make sure that our web pack task
is up and running.
So we're just going to run NPM run Dev once that's running that will allow us to view our Web site in
the browser by visiting local host Colin 3000.
Now earlier in the course when we wrote the CSX for this large hero block we were previewing things
in our browser from a desktop or laptop perspective.
But if I begin to make my browser window smaller to resemble the form factor of a smartphone I think
it becomes immediately clear that the large hero text is too large for a smartphone.
So let's adjust our CSF to fix that.
So in our text editor within the app folder and then the assets folder styles and modules folder let's
open up the large hero CSX file.
Let's address the top main title first.
So this element so here is the rule for that element.
So we might be tempted to leave this font size declaration in place and write a new media query that
targets smaller screens.
But remember in the mobile first philosophy we want to treat the mobile view as our baseline and modify
things from there as necessary.
So to approach this from a mobile first perspective let's go ahead and cut this line into our clipboard
and say that the baseline style for this element should have a font size of one point one rim and we
can modify things from here.
For larger screens so we can use a media query say media if a screen is larger than five hundred and
thirty pixels then what do we want to do.
We can just paste in the line that we copy to our clipboard a moment ago.
Let's go ahead and save this file and if we jumped to the browser we see that this element now uses
the baseline font size of one point one RAM and only want to make my web browser larger.
Does it receive the media query style.
Perfect.
Now before we go ahead and adjust the font size of this element and this element I want to show you
a quick post CSX tip that will make working with media queries much easier.
I want us to leverage the power of mix ins.
If you've never heard of a mixing before that's a OK.
The first thing we want to do is configure our post CSF setup to support mix ins.
So to do that let's jump to the command line and install a new package from NPM.
So in the command line first we'll need to stop the current instance of web packets running so press
control C.
And now we can run the following command npm install in the name of the package is post CSX dash mix
ins and then at the very end let's include dash dash save dash Dev go ahead and press enter.
OK.
And now to actually leverage that package we just need to jump into our web pack config J.S. file up
towards the top.
We created this array named post CSX plug ins.
How about right after post CSX import.
Let's just add a new line and let's require in require parentheses and its name is quotes post CSX dash
mix ins and be sure to include a comma at the very end of this line.
Let's go ahead and save this file.
And now we can start Web pack up again.
So in the command line NPM run Dev OK.
At this point let's jump back into our large hero CSX file and let's create a new mix in that will make
working with media queries throughout our entire Web site much easier.
So a Mixon is really just a reusable bit of code so we don't want to store the mix in itself in this
large hero block file instead in our app assets styles folder within the base folder let's create a
new file and let's name this file underscore mix ins dot CSX.
Let's create a mix end that passes styles along only to screens that are larger than what we typically
consider a smartphone size.
So to create a new mix in we just say at Symbol.
Define Mixon.
And then we can give our Mixon a name.
Let's name this mix in at small.
And now we get to say what the Mixon should do.
So we just wanted to create a media query and this media query should only select screens that are five
hundred and thirty pixels or larger.
This is just a somewhat arbitrary number I'm choosing.
But let's go ahead and stick with this.
So you and I are on the same page.
All right.
And what should be placed within this media query.
Let's just say mix in content.
This line of code will make sense once we actually use this mix in.
So let's go ahead and save this file.
And before we can use this mix in in our large hero block file we need to open our main style sheet
which lives in our styles folder and its named styles dot CSX.
Now right after this variables line let's create a new line and go ahead and import that Mixon file
that we just created.
So it lives in the base folder and its name is underscore mix ins.
All right.
So let's save this main file.
And now we can access the mix in from any of our files.
So here we are in the large hero CSX file.
Let's delete this media query and try using our mix in instead.
So instead of typing at media to begin a media query we can type at mix in to begin using a mix in the
name of the mixing that we want to use is at small curly brackets and then we can just say font size
should be four point eight REM.
All right let's try using our mix in again.
So we've adjusted this element.
Let's try adjusting this element so that element is named subtitle.
So let's adjust this font size.
Let's copy this to our clipboard and say that the baseline font size should only be one point one REM
and now instead of having to type out a media query and remember the pixel threshold that we set of
530 all we need to remember is at mix in small and then paste in that font size that we had just a moment
ago.
And there we have it.
Now I realize that this mix in name that I chose at small might be a bit confusing because you might
think aren't the baseline styles intended for small screens.
Well it might help to think of our baseline styles as being called at smallest or at tiny or at microscopic
right.
We want these styles to be applied to every screen even if that screen is only one pixel wide.
These styles are four screens so small we aren't even going to try to come up with a name for how small
the screen is.
And only once a screen is at least five hundred and thirty pixels wide will we consider it small.
I think the best way to explain this system would be to just create another mix and really quick so
intermix in file let's create another mix in the fine mix in and let's name this one at medium.
So this will be almost identical to our first mix in.
Let's just copy these lines and paste them in.
Except at medium we'll have a min width of 800 pixels.
And while we're at it why don't we create a third mix.
Let's copy these lines paste them again.
The third Mixon will be named at large and it will have a min width of twelve hundred pixels.
Now let's save this file and let's try using all three mix ins on this top.
Your clarity heading so in our large hero file.
Here is the rule for that main title element.
Let's say the baseline font size for super tiny screens should be one point one room beginning at the
size of small at small.
Let's try a font size of 2 Ram beginning at the size of medium at medium.
Let's go with font size of three point two ram and beginning with the size of large.
So at large screen sizes let's try a font size of four point eight Ram.
So let's save this.
And check out the browser so here is the baseline style.
And if I make my browser a little bit larger this is what we consider a quote small screen size and
we can see the font gets bumped up a bit.
Make my browser a little bit larger.
This is what we consider a quote medium screen.
The font gets bumped up and if I make my screen resemble the size that we are considering quote large
we see that our four point eight REM style is being observed.
All right.
So this is the mobile first CSF pattern that we are going to follow throughout the remainder of the
course.
We begin with the baseline styles that we want all screens to receive including super super tiny screens
and we modify things for larger and larger screens progressively and that will bring this lesson to
a close in our next lesson we will learn about responsive images which are absolutely vital to the mobile
first idea of only sending users the data they actually need.
It's going to be a lot of fun and I will see you in the next lesson.